It is truly our pleasure this evening to
bring you Dr. Siddhartha Mukherjee, a
cancer specialist and researcher
who is on the forefront of discovering
new treatments using innovative
biological methods.
A Pulitzer Prize winning author, Dr.
Mukherjee has been equally energetic in
writing the story, if you will, of
cancer, a disease that sickens and kills
millions of people around the globe each
year.
Tonight, he will be talking about his
newest book entitled The Gene: An
Intimate History, which debuted at
number one on the New York Times
bestseller list.
We have asked Roy Jensen to introduce
tonight's speaker. And in my
conversation with him earlier, he just
wanted me to say here's Roy and let him
come out, but I think he he warranted a
bit more of an introduction than than
that.
Um
Dr. Jensen was born That's a true story,
by the way.
Was born in Kansas City, Kansas and he
earned his bachelor's degree in biology
and chemistry from Pittsburgh State
University. He graduated from Vanderbilt
University School of Medicine where he
completed his residency in anatomic
pathology and a fellowship in surgical
pathology. He subsequently was appointed
assistant professor in the departments
of pathology and cell biology, later
earning promotion to associate
professor.
In 2004, Dr. Jensen returned home to
Kansas where he was named the William R.
Jewell, MD Distinguished Kansas Masonic
Professor, director of the University of
Kansas Kansas Cancer Center, director of
the Kansas Masonic Research Institute,
and professor of pathology and
laboratory medicine, anatomy, and cell
biology, cancer biology, and molecular
biosciences.
He currently has over 150 scientific
publications to his name.
And he has lectured widely on the
clinical aspects of breast breast cancer
pathology.
Since becoming director of the
University of Kansas Cancer Center, Dr.
Jensen has recruited and led a truly
world-class team, which resulted in the
center achieving the status as a
National Cancer Institute designated
cancer center. And I can't think of a
better person to deliver this this
introduction to our speaker. So, please
help me to welcome Roy Jensen.
Well, thank you very much, Clarence. It
is my pleasure
to uh uh introduce our speaker tonight.
And um
when Victor asked me to do this, I was
absolutely delighted uh for a couple of
reasons, one of which is uh I was really
happy uh to be able to uh come to an
event uh for the Hall Center for the
Humanities.
Uh it is a a critical uh part of our
cultural community uh here in Lawrence
and really across all of Kansas City.
But also um
uh the other reason is that uh I have
heard uh Sid Mukherjee speak on several
occasions.
And uh you are truly
um in for a treat uh tonight.
In addition to being a world-class uh
cancer clinician
and researcher
and uh Pulitzer Prize uh winning author
he is an incredible uh storyteller.
And he has chosen to devote um that
aspect of his life
to really talking about uh the
intersection of science and society and
how that
um collision
uh impacts
uh all of us.
And um
at the um at the reception uh before uh
this lecture, he was telling us that um
this latest book that he's going to be
discussing tonight is going to be part
of a three-part series. And uh
I I won't uh um
steal any more of his thunder than that,
but I was delighted to hear that uh he's
going to be continuing uh in this vein
of really helping to illuminate uh some
of the most important issues that we
face
uh today as a society.
So, without further ado, I would I'm
delighted to introduce to you Dr.
Siddhartha Mukherjee from Columbia
University.
Thank you for that very warm
introduction.
Um and thank you everyone for coming.
Uh
many of you might have expected a
an abstract talk about
medicine and science and the future,
which um I will certainly try to
deliver. But let me begin by asking you
to just have a quick look at your
neighbors. Just acknowledge who is
around you because I'm going to ask you
very s- in all seriousness, I'm going to
ask you two or three questions.
And I want you to think about them.
You're welcome to answer them. Raise
your hands if you want to. If you want
to abstain, that's fine.
How many of you want to know the height
of your unborn child?
The future height of your unborn child.
You don't know your child is
about to be born and maybe in 20 years
from now, a genetic
tester, counselor, private company
says that with a great degree of
accuracy
60, 70, 80% I can predict for you the
height of your unborn child. How many of
you would sign up for such a test? Raise
your hands.
Look around.
Okay?
Question two.
Um you have two children.
Um
and far from being able to predict with
that 60, 70, 80% accuracy
we now drop the odds to 5 or 10%
but the consequences are quite serious.
So, how many of you
would choose to know
if your child carries a 5% say risk of a
severe psychiatric illness in the
distant future?
And maybe we know that there are no
treatments right now, but 10 years from
now there might be new treatments for
this. Raise your hands.
Look around.
Okay, these are uncomfortable questions.
I'm sorry. But they're important
questions. Question three.
20 years from now
our society has changed fundamentally.
We routinely have in vitro fertilization
um
and in that process um we sequence the
genes of these
pre-implanted embryos, embryos before
they're implanted.
Are you comfortable with a world in
which we sequence these embryos and
would you be okay with the idea that we
eliminate an embryo say where we detect
a 5 or 10% chance of a future risk of
cancer and that's the only thing you
screen for. You don't know whether this
embryo happens to be the one that will
be
productive, the president of the United
States, a creative genius, etc. Are you
comfortable with a society where we
screen such embryos and decide only to
implant embryos where we know that the
risk of cancer is diminished from 5% to
1%. Who's comfortable with this society?
You are. Yeah? Several people are. Raise
your hand. Be proud of it.
On the on the idea. Yeah? Couple of
hands here. Okay.
So,
I'm going to talk today about um far
from talking about what you might
consider some abstract ideas. I'm going
to talk about ideas that are very
relevant to us today because these
kinds of questions are questions that we
will, I think, face increasingly as
um physicians, as human beings, as
scientists, but also, of course, um in
society at large. Um
I will talk about cancer because I think
the payoffs of of genetic
the genetic understanding of cancer is
deep and consequential.
But I will also want to talk about what
might happen as we broaden our
understanding widely outside very
small realms of cancer and talk about um
how what it means to each one of us
individually.
Very widely speaking, I want to talk
about genetic prediction and
manipulation. I want to talk about deep
learning. And I want to talk about this
idea of precision medicine for cancer.
What does it mean What does it mean now
that we begin to understand or have
begun to understand cancer in a much
more fundamental and rather precise way
in individuals?
And one of the things I want to show
you, of course, is that these things
these three ideas um the um
the idea that you can read much, much
more deep information about the human
genome that was previously possible.
The idea that you can use computational
algorithms to understand
pieces of that information that were
previously invisible to us.
And the level of comfort that we have or
discomfort that we have, once we unleash
our computational overlords on our own
genomes,
what that might do to our societies,
what that might do to ourselves.
Whether these will create deeper
inequalities, whether they will solve
diseases that we've only been hard have
been hard to solve.
And I also want to talk about the rich
payoffs, the idea that you can use these
this understanding to create new
medicines in cancer and diseases,
neurological diseases, heart disease,
things that we've struggled to cure and
treat in the last few decades.
So,
before we do all of that, I'm going to
delve into a little bit of history, tell
you a little bit of a story because this
is the story of this book of of my book,
but also it's the story the larger story
of the of of the human genome. The story
begins in a strange place. It doesn't
begin in a laboratory. It doesn't begin
in an university. It doesn't begin in
a standard place that you might imagine
the most consequential and I would argue
the most dangerous idea in the history
of in the recent history of science came
from.
It begins in a monastery. It begins in a
monastery. I I spent time here. I spent
a week and a half here
6 years ago
in a small town called Brno.
And that's where
in this walled garden
a small
area in this room over here, this corner
room overlooking the walled garden a man
named Gregor Mendel began to perform
some experiments. He was a monk. He had
been rejected multiple times from
university education.
He was a failed biologist, which is
should give us all a lot of
reassurance
that you can essentially write the most
important paper in the history of
biological sciences having failed your
examinations in biology.
But here he was. He was a basically he
was a monk and he was a substitute
teacher. And he began he began to
experiment.
We think, although we're not sure, in
this little plot of land
with which is weirdly enough planted
with gardenias. Um
But anyway, but he of course Mendel
began to plant peas. Why you would take
Mendel's garden and put gardenias in it,
I don't know, but
anyway.
Um but Mendel began to plant peas and he
made in 1864, 1865 an incredibly
important realization. And that
realization was that heredity
the fact that you and I resemble our
parents somewhat
um
that is carried not by some kind of
miasmic substance, some kind of peculiar
weirdness but in fact is carried in a
discrete form like information moving
from your parents to the offspring, from
your parents to you in a kind of
discrete informational form like words
in a sentence. You can't tear those
words apart, they will lose meaning. You
can't scatter the letters apart, they
will lose meaning. Like the word word
it is inherited in fullness from your
parents to your offspring, to the
children.
And Mendel described all of this just by
looking at in great detail by looking at
peas. And it had many consequences. He
realized that in every generation
information in this discrete form
not in the kind of blended form is
moving from one generation to the next.
Now, just to contrast this with a very
simple idea which existed before Mendel,
people thought that
your nose or your eyes are some kind of
intermediate between your father's and
your mother's nose and eyes. And this
was human intuition for generations that
we were the products of some kind of
blending that the genetic information
was taken from your father and you from
your mother and blended in some kind of
biological blender and your nose came
out of that. It's a very intuitive idea.
It makes a lot of sense.
Except of course it has one big problem.
It takes you 2 seconds to figure out
what that problem is.
And it's called gender.
Right? So, it couldn't possibly be true
that in every generation there's some
kind of blending going on because
otherwise our anatomies would become
genderless. So, there has to be a reason
that you and I are inheriting
information from our parents that is
somehow that is somehow kept generation
upon generation intact.
And it's astonishing
that would take Mendel in 1864
several thousand years
after many of the fundamental
tenets of biology had been discovered
to essentially rediscover this idea that
of course that information, hereditary
information, the thing that makes us
that gives us our anatomy, our
physiology, our traits, our
our and by extension our identities
is not being blended in some kind of
biological blender, but is carried out
in discrete in this form that reproduces
itself generation upon generation.
That's the only way you can explain how
gender, male, female remain
anatomically, physiologically remain uh
intact as it were generation upon
generation. There's no other simple
explanation for that.
What's interesting to me about that
story about the story of the discovery
of genes as a fundamental unit is that
soon after Mendel had discovered this
biologists who worked on
genes in the early 1900s were speeding
forward a little bit. In the early 1900s
began to realize
that this was a powerful and dangerous
idea long before they knew what it was.
What carried this information?
How was this information transmitted?
What was its relevance to diseases like
cancer or metabolic diseases or
diabetes? What was its relevance to of
this information that moved from parent
to offspring long before we knew all of
this.
The movement to use that information to
discriminate between human beings, to
make
to to identify those who were weak
versus those who were strong already was
being practiced. Here a couple of
examples of that. It's interesting that
the first the most powerful examples of
what we call eugenics, the idea of using
genes to understand and thereby
the hope to create a better society by
using genetics was actually born very
soon after Mendel. It was born in the
UK. It was born in England
and led really by a man who coined the
word eugenics itself, Francis Galton.
Galton was a cousin of Darwin's. And
while Darwin was thinking about
evolution
Galton was thinking about social
evolution. How can we make better
societies? And of course one way to make
a better better society he thought was
by selecting selectively breeding the
best together. By selectively breeding
the people who were the best adapted,
the best looking the the the the the
brightest, the smartest. These were
Galton Darwin's own ideas. Um so, this
was he this was so called positive
eugenics, the idea that you would use
this
feature, the selective breeding of human
beings
to create better humans, better
societies, better races, better
countries.
Um
The idea then morphs and comes to the
United States. Now, recall that we
haven't even spoken about Germany yet.
Um in the 1910s and 1920s where these
kinds of advertisements are
popular. You would open up magazine and
see something like this.
And in the United States it morphs into
a kind of practical
realm.
In the United States it becomes moves
from selective breeding to selective
sterilization.
Why don't we sterilize
women or men, but of course women
predominantly, who are likely to carry
defective traits into the next
generation and thereby remove their
influence from future societies. This is
Carrie Buck. My book is dedicated to
Carrie Buck. I would encourage everyone
to read that history. The history is
very pertinent to this state as well.
Carrie Buck was one of the first women
to be sterilized under this law of
trying to make sure that the best
that that people who were unfit to breed
were sterilized. The case climbed to the
Supreme Court and there was a judgment
passed down which is very chilling. It
says three generations of imbeciles is
enough and Carrie Buck was forcibly
sterilized to prevent the prevent the
birth of what was then considered
genetically defective mentally ill
children. It turns out in retrospect
that in fact Carrie Buck had really no
illness. She was just one of us.
But it's a it's it's a reminder of how
quickly from 1864 to 1920, barely a
flash of time, that the idea of
heredity, of genetics, of inherency was
being moved from an abstraction,
something that someone was planting a
monk was planting in peas, to an idea
that was used as a as as
of social and biological control. Here,
of course, is that example of that.
Um
it is only after all of this
and remember we still don't know what
the carrier of this information is,
who's carrying this information, where
this information comes from. Is it a
chemical? Is it a substance? What is it?
We don't know any of this.
We're in the 1920s, 1930s that that same
idea morphs from eugenics as
uh a mechanism of breeding the most uh
the best and the brightest as Galton
would have it in the in England to
eugenics as a
uh sterilization effort against uh women
who carried uh what was thought to be
genes of imbecility and other
weaknesses. Um and ultimately it morphs
to its most macabre form, which is the
form that we remember it today, which is
uh Nazi Germany.
Here are uh here's a Nazi physician
measuring twins. Here is um actually one
of the most interesting images that I
found while working on the book. Um um
SS cadets, you can see a swastika um in
this man's hand um watching on the
blackboard. And if you look in the
blackboard, um the man who is the um a
captain of the Nazi uh party um has
Mendel's laws and Mendel's uh uh
diagrams up on the blackboard.
Um here is from the United States a
better babies contest.
Some of you might remember these better
babies contests. Um here are babies
being judged for being the most
eugenically fit. Um they are being
judged for future the idea that you
would create a future race where this
would now become um
racially cleansed and therefore superior
um as a mechanism of social control.
Barely, as I said, 40 years after the
discovery of the idea of the gene
itself.
One of the consequences of the war
was that it brought a sense of shame to
this project. A very important sense of
shame to this project. Um
an embarrassment because of the Nazi
excess of it.
But what what one of the things I want
to talk about is that it never fully
decapitated the desire.
The desire to improve ourselves, the
desire to improve our societies, desire
to improve our own children through
control
of heredity is an ancient desire. And
that's why I asked you those first few
questions to ask ourselves about what we
really desire. What do we desire? What
kinds of things are we going to allow
our societies uh to move into
um as we move forward into understanding
more and more about ourselves. Keep that
thought in mind.
So, I'm going to go back into the
history. I'm going to bring you up to to
um
quickly. I'm going to bring you up to
where we are today and then go back into
these questions that I had just asked
you before. So,
um
the explicit eugenic desires
of the 1920s and 1930s were contained
partly because of the excesses of what
happened in Germany in the 1930s and
1940s, the extermination
of human beings based on eugenics. This
the the final that the the progression
from
better breeding
to sterilization to extermination was a
was of course a step way into the abyss
of eugenics. And by the 1940s, we had
decided as societies to keep aside those
questions, move them away, and instead
concentrate on what was it
that was transmitting
this information across generations.
And that, of course, turned out to be a
molecule that was very unknown to most
biologists called DNA. If you said the
word DNA in the 1920s and 1930s, if said
you were working on DNA, people would
say, "What a weird thing to work on." Um
it is a strange molecule, not
interesting, probably some structural
component of uh the human body.
Who would have thought that this would
be the carrier of information?
But in fact, this is a picture of
Rosalind Franklin, whose birthday we
celebrated a few months ago, um looking
down a microscope and taking photographs
of the substance that she and others by
that time had known
and had established was in fact the
molecule that Mendel had identified.
Mendel didn't know any about the
molecules, but the but the substance
that lay behind uh Mendel's uh idea that
heredity was transmitted across
generations.
And the final structure of that molecule
was solved in the 1950s by Jim Watson
and Francis Crick. And here is that
first model of that molecule, um a
double helix.
Um
all of us contain every cell in our
bodies contains this double helix. If
this double helix was in a single cell
was expanded out
it would be it's and and put all
together in a long chain, it would be
several meters long.
And each cell of our body contains this
information, this twisted double helix,
and condenses it many fold, almost a
million fold, into that cell.
And that information
tells the cell how to behave, what to be
how to act, and it gets transmitted from
us to our children through sperm and
eggs. And that is of course the secret
behind the transmission of information
from one generation to the next. Now,
if I took
your um
genome
uh it would contain this double helix,
obviously in this double helix form,
this chemical form. It would contain 3
billion letters of uh of DNA
written ACTG.
And if you think about that, if it was
standardly printed on an encyclopedia,
it would be about 70 full sets of the
Encyclopedia Britannica. One human
being's genome. So,
all the walls you can imagine in this um
in this room would be lined with your
genome. And if I wanted to move to your
genome, I would have to make another
auditorium this size and line all the
walls again with the encyclopedia of
your genome and so forth. So, each of
one each one of us
carries within our bodies one such
70-set Encyclopedia Britannica.
Now,
we knew this, we began to understand
this, and we also began to understand
that you could pick out one volume, one
page, and it would be inscrutable to us
in the 1960s, 1950s. It would read ACTG
CCTG and so forth. We would have no
meaning behind all of this.
But how
does
this encyclopedia specify us?
How does it specify us in our
uh
our the the structure of our body, our
forms, our cells?
And does it also specify things that are
beyond simple, not just the shape of
your nose, not just the color of your
eyes,
but of course the propensity to develop
diseases?
Does it specify fate? Does it specify
the capacity to develop um mental
illness?
Does it specify our choices? Does it
specify identity? How much of identity?
How does it interact with the
environment
this code
that each of us carries
and make us?
These are the kinds of questions that we
began to think about in the 1960s and
1970s. We didn't know the answers to.
And as we understand the answers to
these questions, on one hand, we acquire
the capacity to cure and um and deliver
promises for incredibly important
diseases. I'll talk about that.
But also it opens up deep questions
about who we are and what we need to
know and how much we are willing to know
about um the future.
But back then to the question of, "Okay,
so you have this encyclopedia.
Each one of us has an encyclopedia. How
does it make us? How does that
encyclopedia, which is a kind of
information, ACTG CCT CCT, so on for 3
billion letters. How does that make
human beings?"
Well, the simple answer is that it makes
human beings uh it makes animals,
organisms by creating messages, and
those messages ultimately uh become
functional. Those messages become
actualized.
Um the difference between Sydney Brenner
and Jim Watson
the difference between younger Jim
Watson and an older Jim Watson, etc. are
because the same the genome the they're
two different genomes in two different
cases. They have interacted with the
environment with two different
environments. They've specified
functions, and these two functions have
ultimately translated themselves into
two very different people.
And there were molecular correspondence
to this. You don't need to know all the
details, but the point is that the gene
was carried in DNA as I just said. This
message is RNA, and the form and
function is a mixture really of RNA and
protein, but really is this this piece
of it. The scientific details are
unimportant. The most important piece is
that somehow or this somehow or the
other, for most uh purposes,
this Encyclopedia Britannica, 70 volumes
of it, gets that message, the
information carried in it, much like a
computer gets translated into real
words, real information, and get then
gets actualized in our bodies.
And
um work done by several other people,
this is work done by Marshall Nirenberg,
we learned to read the how this
information we began to learn to read
how this information actually gets
actualized. And by the 1950s and 1960s,
again, this idea that DNA makes a
message, makes a protein um was was made
obvious.
There was one last thing we need to
know, and that's important, and that is
that
this is a dynamic process.
Here's the best example of the dynamism
of this process. This creature
which looks nothing like this creature,
both of these have the same DNA.
Their information is exactly identical.
So, somehow or the other in this state
the genome of this um
caterpillar
reads out caterpillar
and within the within the matter of
several days, um several hours, that
same genome is read out to make a
butterfly.
And if you understand this, you begin to
understand how you can have thousands of
different cell types in your body, but
every cell carries the its own genome.
Your liver cell, your brain cells, your
nerve cells, your blood cells all carry
the same genome. They interact, this
genome sort of expresses itself, this
encyclopedia makes different versions of
itself. It actualizes itself differently
in different cells and different organs,
and that is called gene regulation.
So, by the 1950s and 1960s, we had
realized all of this, that there was a
master encyclopedia
that we carried in our cells. This
uh allowed the creation of very
different forms by reading out subparts
of it. But in fact, despite that, the
that the master message, the
encyclopedia remained the same.
But the question was there were two
questions, could we
read the actual letters?
And number two, could we change the
actual letters?
And that's what I'm going to spend the
rest of my talk thinking about. What if
we learn to read all of this
its information, and what if we then
began to write some of this information?
Um the reading of the information began
in the 1970s
when uh Fred Sanger deduced some
mechanism, you don't again need to know
about the details, but to really
decipher what the actual code was. So,
all of a sudden we began to read A C T G
C C. We we began to understand what the
actual manifestation of the code was.
So, you could say, "What is the code in
on page 370 of your encyclopedia?" It
was unknown to us, we knew there was a
code, it was unknown to us, but we began
to read that code. So, I call that
reading genetic information.
Um and the second part of that was that
we began to find mechanisms in science
to change genetic information, to
combine it from one to the other. I'll
give you the simplest example.
What if I took
um your encyclopedia, took page 370, and
swapped it with someone else's?
Move those two pieces around. It would
be like writing a new volume of a new
encyclopedia, correct?
So, by the 1970s, we had just begun to
do this. We had just begun to
find ways to sequence or read the human
genome
and we had just begun to create ways to
swap the human genome.
And this already had many many
consequences. I'll give you the simplest
consequences. Take a medicine like
insulin.
A medicine like insulin, you it's very
hard to extract. But what if you could
make you could take human insulin, tear
that page out of the human encyclopedia
and put it into a bacteria and make the
bacteria make human insulin.
Or make the a yeast or some other cell
make human insulin. All of a sudden,
you've just essentially swapped one gene
from one organism to another. You can
move genes across the um the biological
kingdom, and you begin to invent a whole
universe of new medicines because
because you've taken torn out one piece
of the encyclopedia, moved it to another
animal, moved it to another plant, and
begin to manufacture it. In fact, this
is work done by Herb Boyer, Bob Swanson,
who was a was a venture entrepreneur
capitalist venture capitalist. And here
they are actually showing how you can on
a blackboard they're showing how you how
they started making thinking about
making drugs like insulin.
Obviously, this reading and writing
must create fears about who we are as
human beings. This is a comic strip that
I found from the 1970s
um in which uh
the the fear is um
what would happen
if we if we started swapping this
information without control. The idea of
the evil brotherhood of mutants. Um
what would happen if you started moving
uh information from one organism to the
another organism, making
i- i- not by natural means, nature makes
mutants all the time, but making mutants
um
by artificial means, by tearing out
words, moving words from one um one
encyclopedia to another.
Um and what would happen when you began
to understand human diversity
um in terms of these kinds of uh
methods? What would happen when you
started asking the question, "What's the
difference between this human being who
is obviously much shorter than the rest
of us, and this human being who's a
physician who carries um
uh genes that make him or her much
taller than these patients that he or
she is treating?" What would happen
between those differences? What if we
could read those kinds of ideas? That's
why I asked you a question, "How many of
you would like to know about the height
of your future child?"
And this reading and writing of
information, this is my mentor, Paul
Berg, who was one of the first uh people
in medicine to start swapping genetic
information between organisms. He
invented techniques to say, "Take a gene
from a human being and move it into a
virus, or take a gene from a virus and
move it into a bacteria." And the fears
that that created, this is Fred Sanger
who So, I call this writing, I call this
reading.
The fears this created, of course, went
back right back
to the great fears of the 1920s,
um which is the fears of eugenics. What
if we stuck this information, used it
incorrectly?
Would we start worrying about creating
the so-called perfect race?
So, this is where we sat
at the edge
of uh reading and writing
in the 2000s.
And then
we pushed, we moved over that edge. We
went over the edge because we really
started reading and writing human genes
in a way we hadn't before.
This is the draft sequence of the human
genome published in 2001.
Uh the cover of a a magazine, the
Science magazine. It was the was the
sequence of the of the human genome, the
draft sequence of the human genome. The
first fully read sequence. Obviously,
there's some pieces that are still
missing,
but um but the first fully read
sequence, near fully read sequence of
the human genome. I I I find it very
interesting that all the people
in this um
picture
none of them have disease, or at least
obviously disease. Um
they're all examples of human beings. Um
this guy looks like George Clooney, by
the way. Um
uh
but uh
but all of them um are um
all of them, of course, signal the idea
of normalcy. Um and this was the the
draft sequence of the human genome. This
was the re- beginning of our reading
revolution.
So, what did we learn from all this
reading? We learned a lot.
Number one,
we learned that most human traits are
controlled by multiple genes.
Um very important thing to realize. Your
nose, your eyes, your the color of your
hair, your height, um
aspects of who you are are controlled by
not one gene, typically, but by multiple
genes. There are exceptions to this,
obviously. And therefore,
as a consequence, most common diseases
are polygenic. By polygenic, we means
multiple genes. So, heart disease,
cancer,
most common diseases that we encounter,
aside from the rare diseases, um are
controlled by multiple genes. We should
know all of these facts, actually. These
are going to be principles that allow us
to tackle the questions that I asked you
to start with.
Many diseases have a genetic links, but
right now, we're still in the reading
phase. We still don't know the exact
genes for most diseases, and we
certainly don't know most most genes
that govern um fundamental aspects of
human normal human traits, height,
um hair color,
uh eye color, and so forth.
This is a very important um
um equation.
Um I think it's sort of like the
equation that governs fundamental laws
of physics. The equation that governs
fundamental laws of biology is that
genes plus environments plus chance
gives rise to traits.
Most human traits, I mean, really need
to understand this.
Most human traits are not governed
entirely by genes, are not governed
entirely by chance, but like by a
combination of this.
In contrast, some things are highly
genetic. So, in some traits, genes will
dominate.
In some traits, environments will
dominate, and occasionally chance will
dominate and determine what our ultimate
traits are.
But, we can ask this question
feature by feature, disease by disease,
trait by trait. So, in other words, if
someone asks me the question,
"Is it nature or nurture? Is it gene or
environment or chance?" I immediately
ask them back the question, "Well, what
are we talking about?"
Just to give you again classic examples,
most of
gender anatomy and physiology has a
genetic component, whether you are born
in Antarctica or whether you're born in
um
Tanzania,
fundamental features of male and female
biology for the most part will be
governed by genetic components, the
anatomy and physiology.
There are other aspects of
gender identity features, human identity
that will be governed by some
combination of genes plus environment
plus chance.
There are aspects of diseases that will
be governed by environments and chance,
and this will go on over and over again.
So, whenever people ask me the question,
"Well, is it nature or nurture?" I
always say I always ask back, "Well,
what feature are we talking about?"
because it's going to differ from
feature to feature. And we can identify
It's not a null question,
but it's a question that's very
dependent on what we're asking about.
And as a consequence of all of this, if
we do were to imagine a genetic report
card, this gets back to the first
question that I asked in in the
beginning,
"What if I gave you a report card that
said, you know, you had a 5% propensity
to develop a lethal disease or a
terrifying psychiatric illness?" That
genetic report card will usually be
given in the form of propensities. It
won't be A plus, B minus, C plus. It
will be you'll have a 20% chance, a 10%
chance, a 5% chance to develop breast
cancer in the future, a 12% chance to
become
um to manifest X or Y feature in in in
in in your future.
What's interesting about all of this is
that um
all of this is true.
Most human traits are controlled by
multiple genes. Most common diseases are
polygenic. Most have genetic links, but
the exact genes are still unknown.
The genes plus environments plus chance
gives rise to features,
and that we generally will give rise to
only propensities.
But, what's interesting about this is
that our computational power, our
understanding of where genes is going
for some features is reaching the place
where we can actually start predicting.
And here is exactly the question I asked
you before. This is uh something that
came out 2 weeks ago, and it took me by
surprise. This is a genetic
predictor of human height
based on genes alone.
So, here is the actual height of a human
being, and this is the predicted height
of a human being. And obviously, if it
was exactly correct, it would be a
straight line up like this. These are
about 2,000 human beings.
What's shocking to me is this curve
doesn't look like a mess.
It looks pretty good.
Um and the
for statisticians here, it's not great.
This R value is .64. You could make have
some arguments with it. Obviously, there
are people that are off the straight
line,
but it's not bad either. And that's
what's shocking to me, at least. In
other words, in this experiment, they
knew nothing about a human being except
for the sequence of their genome.
And based on that sequence alone, they
predicted one feature that we find
pretty complex, human height.
And they could feature predict that just
by reading
that encyclopedia.
They read it the the encyclopedia was
was predictive of uh human height.
Why does this matter?
It matters because it has consequence
for virtually every human disease.
It matters because we are trying to
understand maintenance and risk.
It also matters because um we really
need to figure out how to deal with
things like
insurance. What if we were to predict
our own risk uh in the future?
How would we insure anyone? How on Earth
could we insure anyone if we knew began
to understand what the risks were in the
future?
Um
So, that part is about reading. What
happens when you begin to read? But, in
the midst of all of this, we're also
beginning to write. And by write, I
mean, remember I said you can change the
actual content of the encyclopedia. Um
I've called this loosely writing the
human genome, and these are early days
yet, but these are some scientists. This
is Jennifer Doudna. Many of you How many
of you have heard of the word CRISPR?
So, virtually everyone. This word was
obviously not even heard about 10 years
ago. Jennifer is one of the inventors of
CRISPR. She's a colleague. We actually
My own lab works on CRISPR a little bit.
Um I'm doing a talk with Jennifer uh in
January. Um but, in brief, again, now we
have the analogies intact.
Um here is a mutation that causes breast
cancer, and here's a schematic in which
you could go into the encyclopedia, and
potentially in some cell, maybe an
embryonic cell, maybe the cell of an
embryo, you could correct that mutation.
You could erase that.
Go to page 375 in that encyclopedia. Go
to page 375, paragraph four, and where
it says C C T G C, make it C C A G C, or
something like that.
And on one hand, you and I can
appreciate how powerful that would be to
eliminate terrifying diseases or
terrifying risks of terrifying diseases,
breast cancer, pancreatic cancer, um
neurodegenerative diseases, Huntington's
disease.
But, what if we just extended that
concern outside and began to think about
changing fundamental features of human
identity?
What about someone who wanted to have a
very tall child?
Should we allow that?
Or should we say no?
And so, in other words, a combination of
embryology and gene editing techniques
um
have really pushed us to a point of time
where we really have to take these
questions quite seriously. How should we
allow ourselves to intervene on the
thing that we consider most human of
all, or one of the things we consider
most human of all, which is the genome?
Um here's a slide that I find
fascinating. This is from mouse cells,
but very important because here are the
mouse cells. These are the cells you can
genetically modify, and of course,
they're being coaxed and developed to
form these cells.
And this can be done with human cells.
And these cells, anyone know what these
cells are? These are sperm.
So, this is a cell. You can modify this
one. You can edit its genome. You can
change, like I showed you here, you can
erase, you can read, you can write, and
you can now use those cells to make
the very cells that form the basis of
our
um of the of the next generation of
human beings.
And
therefore, you could do things like the
questions I had asked you before. What
if you read, what if you created, what
if one created um not one embryo, but
several dozens,
and sequenced all of them,
potentially change some of them, and you
had the capacity to selectively implant
only the ones that you wanted to change
or you had changed already, so-called
preimplantation genetic diagnosis. These
questions have not fallen on
flat ears.
Um they have been taken up at the
highest levels of concern um in the
United States. A very large committee
met um
several months ago to ask the question,
"Well, what should be allowed? What
should not be allowed? Where should we
stop um this kind of intervention?"
And uh this was a report produced, but
it'll be produced again and yet again um
as we move forward. So, this is a this
is a this is the report. I want you to
read this, not the whole thing. I'm
going to highlight some sections. But,
what are the concerns? Why are we
worried about all of this?
Well, one concern is that we will
diminish the dignity of humans.
Um that we will diminish the respect for
their variety. I like the word their.
It's our variety.
And finally, that there's a lack of
humility. We will be unhumble in the
prospect of being able to change our own
genetic information.
Have we started actually doing this
stuff on human embryos? The answer is
yes, we have.
Um we have started. There have been
three to four attempts at altering genes
in human embryos.
The safety and on-target effects remain
unknown,
but here's the important part. Nothing
in principle stops the field from moving
forward, and there will be inevitable
clashes to come.
And so, the committee
decided there was going to be there were
going to be three criteria
to um develop um
to allow uh human genetic This is
serious stuff, guys. So,
three criteria. This This is kinds of
technology that makes, I don't know,
Uber and Facebook seem like child's play
because we are intervening on things
that we hold stewardship of. And you got
everyone here needs to know the
vocabulary because we will have to make
decisions about what's permissible and
not. So,
three criteria for
uh manipulations of human genomes was
decided.
Um one is that the disease in question
have extraordinary suffering.
Second, that we are confident that when
you make the change in the gene, you
actually are producing um
the disease. In other words, this is not
some kind of 5% relationship. There's
some very direct relationship between
the gene of consequence and the disease.
And third, that there is no other
justifiable alternative and the state is
not coercing you to do all of this.
These seem like very reasonable
criteria. The problem is it takes 2
seconds to understand that they're very
subjective as well. Who defines
extraordinary suffering?
Um, what is the limit? What are the
concept Where do we draw the line
uh in the confidence of the genetic uh
that the gene disease interaction is
tight? Is it 50%? Is it 57%? 52%? 5%?
And what does it mean? What's
justifiable alternative and no coercion
mean in when it becomes privatized when
you can make the decision? The state
says it's not my problem, it's your
problem.
But you now can make the decision to
implant certain embryos. You then in 20
years time can sequence your um the the
the genomes of
unimplanted embryos. Who is to make that
decision?
Um,
I'm going to I'm going to spend a little
bit of time on the last phase of all of
this, which again has deep consequences
for all of us. Um, I'm not going to
spend a lot of time on this and that is
just to emphasize that if these
techniques of reading were already
powerful,
then you can imagine that using very
deep learning algorithms, computational
algorithms, computers that learn,
and using them to understand genetic
information would be would kick this
information to yet another stratosphere.
Um, I have a couple of examples of this.
One example I gave already, uh but I'll
give you a couple more. Here is an
example of um
a young man that I know who has a
genetic predisposition for a melanoma
develop melanomas.
Um, we didn't know that. There was no no
one knew this. But in fact, he developed
one melanoma here, a second melanoma
here, a third cancer here.
Um,
and it turns out that there are now uh
programs that will scan photographs
um of you or scan the lesions that you
develop and and and divide them into
benign versus malignant lesions.
There are programs that are being
developed that will scan your genome to
allow us to really incisively understand
the risk of cancer. You can understand
what the benefits of such therapies
could be. You could be pre-screened.
Um, one proposition is to use Facebook
passively.
So that while you sleep,
if you agree, while you sleep, um
your own pictures are being scanned for
such at the development of such lesions.
How many of you would be comfortable in
a world where you could by consent give
consent to the idea that while you
sleep, um
uh
a computational algorithm filters
pictures of you on social media to find
out diseases that you may have in the
future?
Are we comfortable with that idea?
How many of you would be comfortable
with the idea that your cell phone
begins to pick up in combination with
your genetic predisposition um future
risk for neurodegenerative diseases like
Parkinson's disease that when you pause,
when your words change, when you begin
to understand what it's that a filter
begins to pick up in combination with
your genetic risk, whether you in fact
are at an increased risk of a
neurological disease.
How many of you are comfortable with
this invention, which uses in
combination with your genome, in other
words, your gene genetic you you get
gene sequenced, and then in a bathtub,
as you take your bath, uh an ultrasound
device scans you for the earliest
development of pancreatic cancer?
Important um consequences for all that
we think about. And finally, this curve
that I showed you of height
isn't an abstract curve. This was not
possible before because we didn't have
computational power. This in fact is
this in this this uh this uh study uses
deep learning and it's only through deep
learning that they could get this kind
of prediction of human height.
So,
I'm going to stop at the last point
here, which is that
we are on the verge of making some
important developments in precision
medicine.
The capacity to diagnose cancer earlier,
the capacity to sequence your genes
earlier, so that you can predict risks
for future diseases, the capacity to
understand information that really we
didn't have before. Those are the great
upsides to all of these technologies.
And some of you in this audience
actually are already benefici-
beneficiaries of these. Early detection,
early detection with uh computational
technologies, early detection through
genetic technologies, BRCA1 genes,
breast cancer genes that we can sequence
and therefore predict your future risk
of cancer.
On the other hand, there's a concern
that as we delve deeper and deeper into
these technologies, deeper and deeper
into our own genomes, that we will begin
to assault things that we consider
fundamentally human.
That we begin to assault things that we
consider private information,
information that we change about
ourselves.
Um, I'm going to end with my very
personal anecdote. My family history, I
have a a history of um mental illness in
my family, schizophrenia and bipolar
disorder.
And the question I have two daughters,
and the question arose at some point of
time that we now begin to have, it's
very early days, we're beginning to have
the first genetic hints
of what might increase risk of these two
diseases. And the risks are on the
orders of, you know, 2% increase, 5%
increase, 10% increase in risk.
And the question that my wife and I sat
down with the other night was, should we
sequence our two daughters?
Um, and if
both of them are very well, thank you.
Um,
but what if one of them, both of them
being completely well, fine, no other
illnesses, what if only one of them was
to have that 5% increases? Would it
fundamentally change the way we imagined
that child?
On the other hand, would it make us more
cautious, more thoughtful about the
future of that child? Would it make us
think twice, screen better, think
better, think deeply about that child?
It's a question that will resonate that
does resonate already within society.
It'll keep resonating
with with deeper and deeper penetrance.
So,
I've tried here to to do several things.
I've tried to show you historically
where we've come to.
But I've also tried to show you that
where we've we we've landed up is
extraordinarily complex territory.
On one hand, we have the capacity
to deploy technologies to make medicine
precise for individuals, um including
genetic diagnoses for cancers, genetic
diagnoses for many diseases. On the
other hand, the moral questions, the
ethical questions that have been raised
by these technologies are deep and
profound, and we don't have simple
answers to them. Um, it is an inevitable
consequence that we will have to answer
these
uh questions in the next 10 odd years.
And if if all of us don't get into the
conversation, we don't learn the
vocabulary, if you don't know the
science and the history, we'll be left
out of the conversation. So, um I'm
going to end here and um
open up the floor to I'm sure there'll
be a million questions. Ha.
But I'm going to end here and open up
the floor to questions. Thank you.
I've been reading some in the National
Geographic and some other publications
about young children who uh having been
born a girl or a boy
very deeply recognize that they are the
opposite sex.
Uh-huh.
Is there a genetic connection?
And if so, how much or what do we know
about that genetic connection?
complicated question. Thank you for
asking it. Um,
the quick answer is um
most people, I would say most people,
and I think I'm being fair here, most
people in medicine and biology think
that there will be a strong genetic
connection.
Um, most people in medicine would
suspect that it is not one gene, but
multiple genes, so many a combination as
it were of genes.
Um,
and
uh uh
uh most people would would suspect that
it's it's in the future, very near in
the future, we will be able to decipher
what these are. I'll give you the
classic example. Some of you might think
this is obvious, but let me tell you
what's interesting about it. The classic
the the the important story is going
back to the anatomy and physiology of
gender.
So, male versus female. It turns out
there's, and perhaps not surprisingly,
there's only one gene that controls it.
It's a gene called SRY. If you turn it
off, you go in one direction
anatomically and physiologically. If you
turn it on, you go in another direction.
In fact, you can take animals
uh in which you just change the SRY gene
and they become the embryos switch like
a toggle switch from male to female.
So, that's the top of the hierarchy.
The top of the hierarchy is one gene
that controls a master gene that
controls
the anatomy and physiology of sex.
Now, obviously, gender identification is
more than anatomy and physiology. Um it
involves the
a kind of computational algorithm, as it
were. I don't want to make this sound
too abstract, but uh where you take all
of this and ultimately bring into your
brain the identification of whether you
are one gender or both or sorry, neither
or um or or the spectrum that lies in
between.
Um that is not we we suspect that is not
one gene, but multiple genes. But, we
also suspect that there are genetic
components to this, strong genetic
components to this.
Um so, I suspect you're asking a very
important and and obviously pertinent
question to our times. This has been
politically discussed all across the
board. My personal feeling, my instinct
is that it's likely to be highly
genetic.
One, number two is that it's very likely
that we will decipher the code in the
next 5 or 10 years um using, you know, I
just showed you one example of a very
complicated feature, height, where we've
begun to decipher the code.
I'll throw back the question now at you.
If we deciphered that code,
would you be comfortable in sequencing
your unborn child to know the code?
I think my immediate answer is
yes, because of the amount of confusion,
isolation,
um
just general
uh extraordinary suffering that I think
these people go through
who are born genetically a female, say,
and know very deeply inside that they
are male.
Because of those factors, yes, I would
want to know and
I would also want to know the other
genes that impact
not just the X and Y. I don't want to
know what other genes impact that before
I would actually want somebody going
into my embryo. May I ask you a tougher
Yeah. May I ask you a tougher question?
Mhm. Um suppose there were 10 genes, 15
genes, but one of them was very strong.
Would you be comfortable with
technologies that in your case you would
say yes or other cases people Would you
be comfortable with technologies that
allowed you to change those genes?
I think I would be so that my child
could be definitely either male or
definitely female.
people are comfortable with that idea?
Restricting being
We have enough complexities being one or
the other.
are and that's the point that I'm trying
to raise. Absolutely right. Thank you
for raising this. But, this is morally
complex territory. We have But, it's not
as if we can
put our heads in the sand like ostriches
and say, "Go take them away."
Cuz we've discovered them. We're
uncovering them day by day and we will
continue to uncover them. So, thank you.
Um I'm going to move on to the next
question, but thank you. Very important
set of questions. The other side, sorry.
At this rate, we'll never finish the
evening. So.
Hi. Um I just want to start off by
saying thank you. As a student here at
KU, um you coming here and speaking to
us means a lot. Um my question for you
is um
how far how ubiquitous do you think gene
editing in utero will be, say, you know,
10 years down the line, 20 years down
the line? And do you think that we have
um a society that is adequately equipped
to deal with um
challenging some of the advances we make
in science? Well, I just we just
illustrated some of the challenges right
there in that conversation. So, just to
remind us, we need to rise up to the
challenges because those questions
somewhat have to be answered. You don't
have to be answered immediately, but we
need to think about them. That's one.
Number two is Now, how practical is gene
editing in embryos? Now, in full
embryos, if once an embryo is formed,
many, many cells,
it gets pretty tough because you have to
basically think about correcting
multiple
um
multiple um cells, all the cells,
hundreds of thousands, maybe hundreds of
millions of cells that an embryo has.
On the other hand, it's much more
practical, for instance, in that picture
that I showed you uh before, which is
that you can edit genes in
cells that form egg and sperm.
Um and that that is much, much more
practical to do for lots of biological
and theoretical reasons. So, in fact,
the possibility that we can come to the
edge of creating gene-edited human
beings
is um actually much more practical than
or much more prac- technologically
feasible than we had originally seen.
There's some major challenges still um
and I've I've listed them here. Um
whether there's whether the these
techniques are safe, whether they only
correct the genes or edit the genes of
the target and
leave out all the rest is In other
words, only page 347, word 46 is
corrected, everything else is left
intact. We don't know. I suspect that
that's going to be the case. There'll be
a few off-target effects, but most
things will be on target. So, the bottom
line is that for most organisms,
including human beings,
um I my suspicion is that we will get to
a place that where technologically it'll
become feasible.
Yes.
Thank you. Your your examples largely
make clear the potential, at least, for
clinical health benefit.
How do you think in terms of prospects
for um these discoveries for population
health improvement, particularly
implications for health inequities?
For what? Health inequities? Yes. Uh
I've written about this before. In fact,
obviously,
one big fear, among the many big fears,
one big fear is that we will divide
societies
into into uh structures where some
part of the population has access to
these diseases access to these
technologies and thereby begins to
sequentially eliminate, for all good
reason, um diseases in their own
children,
whereas another part of the population
does not have access to these
technologies and continues, therefore,
to have susceptibility to diseases um
genetic diseases. Um
That would be, as you can imagine, a
deeply consequential political event if
all of a sudden, not only were we become
would we become unequal for economic
reasons, but we would be split into two
genetic societies.
This fear has been raised in
in literature many times, but not really
fully realized, although you could say
that in fact that, you know, the
attempts in the 1920s what what was to
do exactly this.
My my my own fear is that our
technologies are pushing us closer and
closer to that place.
Um
Within the next decade or so, I think
the prospect of having
uh
quite deep prenatal genetic diagnosis
will become affordable for some people,
but not affordable for others. It will
be privatized um
and therefore, I think we will begin to
see these rifts drawn through our
society.
I'm very uncomfortable with that kind of
rift. Um if you can imagine the poor
having not no access to
um
genetic technologies that allow them to
think about their
uh children um
uh in terms of genetic susceptibilities,
the rich having access makes me
extraordinarily uncomfortable. And I
think most people
in this audience would feel similarly
uncomfortable.
Yep.
Sir, good evening.
Uh I have prostate cancer. It was
discovered about 5 years ago. I had
surgery, then I had the radiation
treatment. The PSA keeps ticking up bit
by bit. I see an oncologist every 6
months to get checked out.
I want to ask a question, as you have,
to our audience here. I can see most
people here, but those in the front
might want to turn around and
and uh look at the response I get from
the audience. I want to ask people here,
if you feel comfortable about it, raise
your hand. How many people here have
cancer?
Let me see your hands.
Have cancer or had cancer? Have cancer
or had cancer?
So, that's that we statistically we know
that number's going to be
uh
50 to 70% of this audience.
Good. Thanks.
Hello. Hi. My name is Mukoi and I'm a
graduate student here.
And I have a question that has nothing
to do with your talk. Okay. Very good.
I like questions that have nothing to do
with my But, more to do um with sort of
an observation that I have made. Yeah.
Um you have a passion for making science
accessible and I know that I, who are
not a geneticist, much appreciate the
simple language you've used.
How
what advice would you give a budding
scientist who's also trying to do the
same?
So so, trying to do make science
accessible, you mean?
Yes.
Well, my own my own advice is, you know,
I I was driven by I'm interested in
questions.
Um
uh I I start writing books or articles
or or doing experiments in laboratory
when I have a question that really
really engages me. Um and once the
question is rises to that level of
interest, I become obsessed with it. I
start writing about it. I start thinking
about it.
You know, Emperor, my first book grew
out of a very simple question a woman
asked me. She was a cancer patient. She
said, "Why am I being treated like this?
What happens to me? Why did I end up
here?"
Um The Gene grew out of a different
question. It was the question that I
just asked you. It's a very personal
question. What if you had a two
daughters
at risk of mental illness in your family
and you only wanted and you all of a
sudden discovered genetic information.
So,
um
in my case, I'm very question-driven and
I think that's the simplest way in what
one can become one can start thinking
about communicating questions and
answers to a much wider audience. Thank
you.
Yeah.
Hi, I am Julie and I just started
pharmacy school. Uh-huh. And I was
wondering if you had any advice for
the next generation of healthcare
providers about being a good doctor in
the face of these technologies and
preventative healthcare.
Well, I think we need I think the point
of my talk today was that we need I mean
many of you I don't know how many of you
were aware you These questions the
question that I've asked the question
that I've raised some of the issues I
raised must have been burning in the
background of everyone's minds, right?
Is that true or not true?
You They they must have been in some
slow level of sort of the the back
burner of human kind the filaments that
drive the back burners of your
questions. When you're driving across
vast stretches of Kansas
must have been sitting in the back of
your mind. My point here is to just
bring to bring them right up front.
Because I think they will become they've
already become important. They will
continue to be important and they will
drive some of the fundamental
observations and and concerns of the
next generation. So, again, to go back
to your question, there's no way that a
young scientist a young pharmacologist a
young physician can engage with these
technologies without bringing these
things that have been sitting in the
back burner as it were right up front
and really confronting them. What does
it mean to acquire information which we
didn't have before? What does it mean
for equality? What does it mean for
insurance? What does it mean for
healthcare? What profound things can it
do to our health?
I mean I mean let me not sell these
technologies short.
Um the capacity to annotate cancer
genetically and try to get get precise
medicines for your cancer which is not
the medicine for someone else's cancer.
What a wonderful idea. Um the prospect
to not have a child who has Huntington's
disease and therefore might suffer
might be a wonderful idea. But on the
other hand,
just lying next to those ideas those
technologies those events are things
that obviously are concerning and quite
scary. So, I wanted to
pinpoint those those as well.
I mean we'll take couple more questions
and then stop. Last two. Sorry. We could
go on the entire night. I know everyone
I mean this is what one of the
interesting things about giving this
talk I have to say is that
um
it becomes very quickly a talk about all
of us.
It involves all of us. It's involves all
of our individual lives. So, it becomes
very quickly not an abstract it becomes
about things that are very very close.
Sorry. Go ahead.
Thank you for a very nice talk. I
learned a lot.
My question
if you remove a gene
or editing a gene
can it affect the other genes?
So, it's an important question and and
So, this is what I was trying to talk
about right here actually. So,
we now are trying to understand what the
effect is. Number one, let's say I say
to you you have this 70-volume
encyclopedia erase
you know
the word 16 on page 347.
Um
what would happen to all the other
words? And the funny thing is we really
still don't know. So, this is this
question of is it on target or off
target?
Is it on target? Is it safe? We we don't
fully know for embryos for human embryos
in particular. Um there is a feeling
a a shocking feeling that in fact it
tends to be on target.
You tend not to disrupt everything else.
Um and that goes back to Mendel to some
extent because these things are
discretized. It's not like a vinyl
record in which you put a scratch and
the whole record won't play because it's
a continuous spool of information.
Because genes are quite discrete. They
have their own they move like particles
or like words. You can change one word
erase the word and the rest of the
sentence remains intact. Um I was at a
talk yesterday
where we were discussing gene editing
and the example that was given is um
you know
in the past if you took the word the
phrase twinkle twinkle little star
in the past most of gene therapy that we
could do before we invented all these
techniques was was a kind of crude
replacement. You could say twinkle
twinkle little big star.
Um and your cells don't fully understand
that. There's a little confusion there.
You have little you have big.
One of the interesting things about
these new technologies now you is that
you can with really seems you can strike
out the word little and replace it with
big. So, the cell really reads twinkle
twinkle big star.
Um
obviously that's consequential. We don't
know if other sentences in that phrase
in that poem are affected or not. They
may be. We'll find out. But the early
information suggests that they're not
affected. They're surprisingly
right on the right target.
The whole reason to ask these questions
we have seen in the experimentally
if you insert one gene strong gene in a
cell
exogenously
other gene gets suppressed.
We are we This is very well known. This
is very well known. Okay. Thank you.
Thank you.
Yeah. I'm sure I speak for a lot of the
audience in appreciating the clarity
that you brought in your presentation.
And also uh the ethical questions that
you've raised. It seems to me that
there's a parallel in medical science
right now with these ethical issues and
that comes from neuroscience where we
have where we're growing capacities to
by detecting synapses and averting them
to stop behaviors or make impossible
some behaviors such as removing anger
from our repertoire of emotions. Do you
agree with this parallel?
Yes, I've written about this parallel as
well. You know, so uh
one of the most um
one of the most interesting
uh crisscrosses that I see of course is
the intersection of
uh
neurodevelopmental
um ideas and genetics.
Um I I I read several months ago
actually several years ago in writing
The Gene. I read it and it's in The Gene
here cuz that it's an interesting
section. Encourage you to read it.
There's an interesting section in which
I discussed this article that I read
that sent a kind of shiver up my spine
which is to say that
what if we could take based on genetic
information or other maybe anatomical
information. Remember these things
converge. You can add one to the other
and you get better and better
prediction. You get more and more
precise prediction. What if we could
take uh soldiers
um and identify those with the risk of
PTSD even before we deployed them.
Um
So, some people might say, "Well, that's
a good thing."
Um that would
help us
um in so many
thousands of ways
uh prevent trauma. And then I began to
think do you really want to unleash a
soldier who's unable to
experience
trauma and its consequences in a
battlefield? You really want that kind
of soldier? That's the worst kind of
soldier to deploy.
So,
um
So, obviously I mean I I discussed this
in The Gene. I'd encourage you to read
this section. But obviously you're
asking the question, you know, what if
we could eliminate certain parts of our
human emotional spectrum using a
combination of neurological
neuropharmacological and genetic
techniques um screen those people give
them therapies potentially up front.
Uh
obvi- It is quite clear to me that that
universe is more morally complicated
than
you can imagine. Last question. Yes,
sorry. Uh yes, I'd like to hear your
opinion on
what you feel the effects of trauma are
on the expression of
the genetic code uh
anywhere from a mother who's very
stressed out during her pregnancy to the
more
overt traumas like sexual and physical
Yeah. I think we The quick answer is we
don't know.
Um
and I think that we won't know for a
while. So,
here's what we do know. Um
You're asking two questions. One
question you're asking is
you know
when you have severe trauma of some
sort, does it affect the patterns of
expressions of your genes in your body?
And the answer is
most people would say very likely.
Um
your brain is being remade. Your You
have hormones going through your body
um that are changing patterns of gene
expression. That's the simple part of
the question.
The hard part of the question is how
much of those changes in genetic
expression, not genes themselves,
but the programs um that genes are
expressed in, how much of that is
transmitted to your children?
Um that's a much much harder question
because remember to some extent
a
our children
their genomes are
really are a barrier against this kind
of information penetrating into the
genomes.
I like the analogy between software and
hardware, right? So
there is a strong barrier between
software and hardware in our bodies.
Our experience of trauma, what we
what we experience is is our software
experience.
Um but it doesn't change the genome
itself. It doesn't change the hardware
of our genomes. And in fact, it is it we
we we don't know the extent to which it
changes the hardware of our children's
genomes and their children.
Um it's a field that's being extensively
studied, as you can imagine, and there's
a huge amount of controversy around it.
Um some people say that you can pass
some of this into your next generation.
Some people argue that you cannot. Um we
won't know for a while um because these
are longitudinal studies. You need to
study three two to three human
generations to know. Um and the only
answer is that we'll have to wait to
find out. So
Thank you. Thank you very much. Really
provocative and important questions. Um
and thank you again.